---
title:  The Jam Building Tool
sidebar: home_sidebar
permalink: jam.html
folder: jam
# nav: jam.html
---

## What is Jam? {#what}

Jam is a small open-source build tool that can be used as a replacement
for Make. Even though Jam is a lot simpler to use than Make, it is far
more powerful and easy to master. It already works on a large variety of
platforms (Unix, Windows, OS/2, VMS, MacOS, BeOS, etc.), it is trivial
to port, and its design is sufficiently clear to allow any average
programmer to extend it with advanced features at will.

The main differences between Jam and Make are as follows.

-   Jam uses 'Jamfiles' instead of 'Makefiles'.

-   Jamfiles do not normally contain toolset-specific rules or actions.
    They are thus portable among distinct compilers.

-   Jamfiles are a lot simpler than Makefiles to write and understand,
    while providing the same functionality, and much, much more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Where can I get it? {#where}

There are currently two versions of Jam available.

-   The *classic Jam*, which is available, with documentation, from the
    [official Jam homepage](http://www.perforce.com/documentation/jam)
    at [Perforce](http://www.perforce.com), the original Jam author.

-   An improved version, named *'FT Jam'*, containing several
    enhancements (like the ability to run on Windows 9x systems, or
    additional compiler/toolset support). Look [here](#where-ftjam) for
    download information.

We highly recommend that you use FT Jam as it is *100% backwards
compatible* with classic Jam and can be used as a plug-in replacement
for it. The list of changes between these two programs is available
[here](jam/changes.html).

Alternatively, FT Jam exists because Perforce hadn\'t the time to update
Jam in a *very* long time, and we still hope that these improvements
will be integrated back to classic Jam as soon as possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Why is Jam better than Make? {#why}

There really are a lot of reasons, we name just a few of them.

-   Compiling simple things with Jam is trivial. However, compiling
    complex projects (usually with complex directory hierarchies) is
    still very simple.

-   Jam automatically scans source files for `#include` statements and
    computes header dependencies automatically, and it does so *fast*.

-   The Jam language is simple and expressive, and lets you define your
    own build rules, actions, and functions very easily, unlike the
    ALGOL-like syntax of Makefiles.

-   Jam knows about platform-specific directory separators.

-   Jam is fully customizable, and easy to extend.

-   Jam has a tiny footprint, and is a lot faster than Make at building
    large projects (independent of target build times, of course).

-   We have already mentioned that you don\'t need to modify Jamfiles in
    order to compile the same project with distinct compilers and
    toolsets.

-   Jam parses all Jamfiles in a project before beginning to build
    targets. It knows the full dependency graph and can do parallel
    builds *safely* with the `-j` flag.

-   Jam is compatible with Autoconf. All configuration-specific
    definitions are gathered in a single file named `Jamrules` that is
    shared by all Jamfiles of the same project. The `Jamrules` file is
    generally generated by processing a `Jamrules.in` template with the
    `configure` script on Unix systems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Simple Jam how-to {#howto}

Assuming that the 'jam' executable is in your path (Visual Studio
developers may additionally need to set the environment for command-line
building, e.g. vcvars32.bat)

### Building a project

Go to the project\'s top-level directory, then type

```bash
jam
```

If you do not already have the `JAM_TOOLSET` environment variable set,
JAM will display the available options. Set `JAM_TOOLSET` to the value
appropriate for your environment.

Otherwise, this builds your project\'s file. In case of error, it prints
the build command (compilation, link, etc.) that produced it.

### Installing a project

Once your project is compiled, type

```bash
jam install
```

This installs the project (on Unix-like systems).

### Cleaning after a build or install

Simply type

```bash
jam clean
```

To clean all temporary targets, i.e., object files, libraries,
executables, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Where to get FT Jam? {#where-ftjam}

While the official Jam 2.5 (on which the current version of FT Jam is
based) is available from the [Jam
homepage](http://www.perforce.com/resources/documentation/jam), we
provide our modified version in several ways.

-   **Through SourceForge**  
    Check the package named **`ftjam`** on our [SourceForge download
    page](https://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=3157).
    Currently binary packages are available for older versions only.

-   **Through our FTP mirrors**  
    Check the directory `tools/jam` in [one of our
    mirrors](../download.html#mirrors).

The [Perforce public
depot](https://swarm.workshop.perforce.com/files/guest/david_turner/jam)
holds older versions of the FT Jam sources.

Note that we no longer provide a CVS module for our Jam sources, in
order to avoid painful synchonisation issues between the CVS repository
and the Perforce Public depot.
