---
layout: page
title: The new v40 TrueType interpreter mode
last_updated: 13-Feb-2018
sidebar: docs_sidebar
permalink: docs/subpixel-hinting.html
toc: false
nav: subpixel-hinting.html
---

<small>
2016-09-08, contributed by Nikolaus Waxweiler
</small>

FreeType 2.7 ships the new v40 TrueType instructions interpreter version
enabled by default. It finally brings DirectWrite/ClearType-like
rendering to the screen, or 'subpixel hinting' as some FreeType code
calls it. Actually, there is no subpixel hinting. Read on.

![Demonstration and comparison of the various hinting
modes.](assets/freetype-27-hinting-comparison.png)

For the past years, the previous v35 interpreter did as the TrueType
specification from the 90s said. The TrueType hinting machinery was
originally conceived to make vector outlines render well as
black-and-white bitmaps on the coarse-pixeled CRTs of back in the days.
Look at screenshots of Windows 95 and you\'ll see pixely, bitmappy text.
In reality, the single glyphs are scalable vector outlines beaten into
the pixel grid by small programs run on them inside the font before
being handed off to the rasterizer. Read: glyphs were designed to be
reprogrammed on the fly, per size, for sharper on-screen display.
Microsoft invested significant manpower into what is commonly called the
core web fonts (Arial, Times New Roman, Courier New, etc.) to beat and
re-beat each and every glyph to a full pixel grid at all commonly used
sizes. If this sounds like a lot of sisyphean work, that\'s because it
is. To this day, only few font families have had the same amount of work
put into them.

Times changed, LCDs came along and Microsoft rediscovered subpixel
rendering that exploits the physical structure of LCD subpixels, usually
RGB stripes, to increase the horizontal resolution approximately three
times (not quite actually since you need to apply a blurrying filter to
lessen color fringes). More resolution meant that less work had to be
put into a font and instead of snapping things to full pixels, they
could now be snapped to one of those three subpixels or a fraction of
that for a much finer appearance ('subpixel hinting') while still
appearing sharper than with plain old grayscale antialiasing. Since
fonts are explicitly programmed in the TrueType model, they now had a
lot of older fonts that would need to be updated to take advantage of
the new possibilities or to even render correctly. Knowing this would
never happen, they implemented supersampling and a compatibility mode
that contained several interpreter rigs and preventive measures for
dirty hacks used in older fonts to achieve pixel perfection. Older fonts
that were snapping things to full pixels all around could now at least
benefit a little from the increased horizontal resolution. Beat Stamm
describes this work in detail [on his
site](http://www.beatstamm.com/typography/RTRCh4.htm#Sec1). Microsoft
later released the ClearType collection fonts (Calibri, Cambria,
Consolas, etc.) to demonstrate the new possibilities that just so
happened to rely on this compatibility mode to render correctly. Many
new fonts did and still do.

FreeType didn\'t implement a similar compatibility mode. This had two
side effects.

1.  It lead to glitches when rendering fonts that assumed a
    compatibility mode with supersampler and interpreter rigs is
    present, i.e., most modern fonts.

    ![Hinting comparison of the Consolas
    font.](assets/freetype-27-consolas-v35-v40.png)

    The same can happen on Windows if you disable ClearType in the
    system settings and look at random web pages with custom fonts.

2.  Different fonts in a browser could look jarringly different next to
    each other. Older fonts like the core web fonts snap things to full
    hard pixels on both axes, newer fonts and especially web fonts often
    use a hinting strategy that snaps glyphs to the pixel grid mainly or
    only vertically and with varying strength.

    ![Hinting comparison between Georgia and
    NotoSerif.](assets/freetype-27-v35-v40-different-hinting.png)

    Snapping things to the grid on one axis instead of two greatly
    reduces the complexity and cost of hinting, looks smoother and comes
    with important spacing benefits for horizontal (Latin!) text. And
    it\'s just as readable.

For some time already, FreeType shipped with a v38 interpreter, also
known as 'Infinality'. Its developer set out to make fonts render better
than on Windows and give users the ability to configure font rendering
to their liking. Out of the box, it made fonts look like they were
rendered through ClearType instead of on Windows 95. It was disabled by
default because it was painfully slow and the original developer lost
interest in developing the code further. You\'ll find it used in several
distribution repositories maintained by community members.

My work on stem darkening (incompatible with explicit horizontal
hinting, i.e., TrueType) and frustration that v35 was still the default
(I prefer what DirectWrite/ClearType puts on the screen) led me to strip
the v38 Infinality code to the bare minimum and remove all
configurability in the name of speed and simplicity. The result is
called v40 and it\'s just as fast as v35. v38 is still there and usable,
it just isn\'t compiled in by default. If you compile it in, you can
switch between the different interpreters at runtime, using an
environment variable (or using the property API of FreeType). There is
currently no way to switch this from FontConfig or any other means.
Packagers of 'Infinality' packages will probably jump in and update the
packages accordingly.

Here is the core secret to making fonts render like through
DirectWrite/ClearType on Windows: There actually is no subpixel hinting
going on here. Shock. The code simply ignores *all* horizontal hinting
instructions. That\'s less work than supersampling and gets us almost
identical results *and* additionally prevents changes to the advance
width of glyphs. This greatly harmonizes the look of older and newer
TrueType fonts and incidentally solves glyph spacing problems of less
well instructed fonts. Switching to the new mode might take some getting
used to though, so if you think your fonts are suddenly fat, fuzzy or
weird, give your brain some time to adjust.

No upside without a downside, though. What made v38 so slow was its
attempt to implement the hacks Microsoft describes in a
[whitepaper](https://www.microsoft.com/typography/cleartype/truetypecleartype.aspx)
for their interpreter and rasterizer *and* a configuration layer on top
of that so fonts could be specially handled down to single glyphs. Given
the bugs in and dirty hacks used by Arial and co., this was necessary to
make them render better than on Windows. In my opinion, this is solid
over-engineering in times where the web is full of good-quality
typefaces that display well without horizontal hinting or don\'t even
have it.

The v40 code does not use any whitelist or other means to handle certain
fonts differently. It focuses on ignoring horizontal hinting and
preventing the dirtiest hacks that dent more than they help. Modern
fonts like Calibri, Cambria, Consolas, etc., render well with this
approach, older fonts like Arial, Times New Roman, Georgia and Verdana
display mostly fine with smaller details off. And that\'s okay.
Basically, the harder a font tries to create pixel-perfect black and
white bitmaps for old CRT monitors, the worse the results in the new
mode. If someone finds ways to make older fonts render better without
introducing lists or overly complex hacks, I\'m interested.

PS: I recommend using the Liberation family of fonts (versionÂ 2 and up,
important!) instead of Arial, Times New Roman, and Courier. The family
harmonizes much better internally and is equipped with much better
ClearType-ready hinting. Fedora still ships some 1.x version; you can
get the newer 2.x with improved hinting and glyph coverage from
[here](https://fedorahosted.org/liberation-fonts).
:::
